[DeviceMesh] Add device mesh recipe (#2718)
pytorch/tutorials: recipes_source/distributed_device_mesh.rst

Getting Started with DeviceMesh
=====================================================

**Author**: `Iris Zhang <https://github.com/wz337>`__, `Wanchao Liang <https://github.com/wanchaol>`__

.. note::
   |edit| View and edit this tutorial in `github <https://github.com/pytorch/tutorials/blob/main/recipes_source/distributed_device_mesh.rst>`__.

Prerequisites:

> - `Distributed Communication Package - torch.distributed <https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/distributed.html>`__

Author: > PyTorch 2.2 and Python

Do I just write PyTorch 2.2 and Python? Since 2.2 is not out, so I cannot link it to anything.

> - `Distributed Communication Package - torch.distributed <https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/distributed.html>`__

Reviewer: Yes, that works

.. Setting up nccl communicators for distributed communication during distributed training could be challenging. For workloads where users need to compose different parallelisms,
.. users would need to manually set up and manage nccl communicators(for example, :class:`ProcessGroup`) for each parallelism solutions. This is fairly complicated and error-proned.
.. :class:`DeviceMesh` can help make this process much easier.

What is DeviceMesh
------------------

> .. :class:`DeviceMesh` is a higher level abstraction that manages :class:`ProcessGroup`. It allows users to easily

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. :class:`DeviceMesh` is a higher level abstraction that manages :class:`ProcessGroup`. It allows users to effortlessly 
```

.. figure:: /_static/img/distributed/device_mesh.png
   :width: 100%
   :align: center
   :alt: PyTorch DeviceMesh

Why DeviceMesh is Useful
------------------------

.. Below is the code snippet for a 2D setup without :class:`DeviceMesh`. First, we need to manually calculate shard group and replicate group. Then, we need to assign the correct shard and
.. replicate group to each rank.

.. code-block:: python
import os

import torch
import torch.distributed as dist

# Understand world topology
rank = int(os.environ["RANK"])
world_size = int(os.environ["WORLD_SIZE"])
print(f"Running example on {rank=} in a world with {world_size=}")

# Create process groups to manage 2-D like parallel pattern
dist.init_process_group("nccl")

# Create shard groups (e.g. (0, 1, 2, 3), (4, 5, 6, 7))
# and assign the correct shard group to each rank
num_node_devices = torch.cuda.device_count()
shard_rank_lists = list(range(0, num_node_devices // 2)), list(range(num_node_devices // 2, num_node_devices))
shard_groups = (
    dist.new_group(shard_rank_lists[0]),
    dist.new_group(shard_rank_lists[1]),
)
current_shard_group = (
    shard_groups[0] if rank in shard_rank_lists[0] else shard_groups[1]
)

> # Create replicate groups (e.g. (0, 4), (1, 5), (2, 6), (3, 7))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Create replicate groups (for example, (0, 4), (1, 5), (2, 6), (3, 7))
```

# and assign the correct replicate group to each rank
current_replicate_group = None
shard_factor = len(shard_rank_lists[0])
for i in range(num_node_devices // 2):
    replicate_group_ranks = list(range(i, num_node_devices, shard_factor))
    replicate_group = dist.new_group(replicate_group_ranks)
    if rank in replicate_group_ranks:
        current_replicate_group = replicate_group

.. To run the above code snippet, we can leverage PyTorch Elastic. Let's create a file named ``2d_setup.py``.
.. Then, run the following `torch elastic/torchrun <https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/elastic/quickstart.html>`__ command.

.. code-block:: python

> torchrun --nnodes=1 --nproc_per_node=8 --rdzv_id=100 --rdzv_endpoint=localhost:29400 2d_setup.py

Reviewer: indent so it's under the code block

> .. With the help of :func:`init_device_mesh`, we can accomplish the above 2D setup in just 2 lines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. With the help of :func:`init_device_mesh`, we can accomplish the above 2D setup in just two lines.
```

.. code-block:: python
from torch.distributed.device_mesh import init_device_mesh
device_mesh = init_device_mesh("cuda", (2, 4))

> 

Reviewer: same, needs to be indented.

.. Let's create a file named ``2d_setup_with_device_mesh.py``.
.. Then, run the following `torch elastic/torchrun <https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/elastic/quickstart.html>`__ command.

.. code-block:: python
torchrun --nnodes=1 --nproc_per_node=8 --rdzv_id=100 --rdzv_endpoint=localhost:29400 2d_setup_with_device_mesh.py

How to use DeviceMesh with HSDP
-------------------------------

> Hybrid Sharding(HSDP)

Reviewer: Would like more info about HSDP. What it is what's the benefits/use cases of using with DeviceMesh, etc.

Let's see an example of how DeviceMesh can assist with applying Hybrid Sharding strategy to your model.

.. code-block:: python
import torch
import torch.nn as nn

from torch.distributed.device_mesh import init_device_mesh
from torch.distributed.fsdp import FullyShardedDataParallel as FSDP, ShardingStrategy

class ToyModel(nn.Module):
    def __init__(self):
        super(ToyModel, self).__init__()
        self.net1 = nn.Linear(10, 10)
        self.relu = nn.ReLU()
        self.net2 = nn.Linear(10, 5)

    def forward(self, x):

>         return self.net2(self.relu(self.net1(x)))

Reviewer: indentation

Getting Started with DeviceMesh
=====================================================

**Author**: `Iris Zhang <https://github.com/wz337>`__, `Wanchao Liang <https://github.com/wanchaol>`__

.. note::
   |edit| View and edit this tutorial in `github <https://github.com/pytorch/tutorials/blob/main/recipes_source/distributed_device_mesh.rst>`__.

Prerequisites:

- `Distributed Communication Package - torch.distributed <https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/distributed.html>`__
- Python
- PyTorch 2.2

> Setting up the NVIDIA Collective Communication Library (NCCL) communicators for distributed communication during distributed training can pose a significant challenge. For workloads where users need to compose different parallelisms,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Setting up distributed communicators, i.e. NVIDIA Collective Communication Library (NCCL) communicators for distributed training can pose a significant challenge. For workloads where users need to compose different parallelisms,
```

Reviewer 2: Since DeviceMesh does not only support NCCL (i.e. user can register custom backend too), let's be clear on this

users would need to manually set up and manage NCCL communicators (for example, :class:`ProcessGroup`) for each parallelism solutions. This process could be complicated and susceptible to errors.
:class:`DeviceMesh` can simplify this process, making it more manageable and less prone to errors.

What is DeviceMesh
------------------
:class:`DeviceMesh` is a higher level abstraction that manages :class:`ProcessGroup`. It allows users to effortlessly
create inter-node and intra-node process groups without worrying about how to set up ranks correctly for different sub process groups.
Users can also easily manage the underlying process_groups/devices for multi-dimensional parallelism via :class:`DeviceMesh`.

.. figure:: /_static/img/distributed/device_mesh.png
   :width: 100%
   :align: center
   :alt: PyTorch DeviceMesh

Why DeviceMesh is Useful
------------------------

> DeviceMesh is useful, when composability is requried. That is when your parallelism solutions require both communication across hosts and within each host.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
DeviceMesh is useful when working with multi-dimensional parallelism (i.e. 3-D parallel) where parallelism composability is requried. For example, when your parallelism solutions require both communication across hosts and within each host.
```

The image above shows that we can create a 2D mesh that connects the devices within each host, and connects each device with its counterpart on the other hosts in a homogenous setup.

> Without DeviceMesh, users would need to manually set up NCCL communicators before applying any parallelism.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Without DeviceMesh, users would need to manually set up NCCL communicators, cuda devices on each process before applying any parallelism, which could be quite complicated
```

The following code snippet illustrates a hybrid sharding 2-D Parallel pattern setup without :class:`DeviceMesh`.
First, we need to manually calculate the shard group and replicate group. Then, we need to assign the correct shard and
replicate group to each rank.

.. code-block:: python
    import os

    import torch
    import torch.distributed as dist

    # Understand world topology
    rank = int(os.environ["RANK"])
    world_size = int(os.environ["WORLD_SIZE"])
    print(f"Running example on {rank=} in a world with {world_size=}")

    # Create process groups to manage 2-D like parallel pattern

>     dist.init_process_group("nccl")

Reviewer 2: I do rememeber this code snippet also need to set cuda device somewhere because `init_process_group` won't set up the cuda device automatically, and it requires user to set up. I guess it's not erroring out in this example because we haven't run any collectives in this example yet. But we might want to set up the cuda devices for completeness

    shard_rank_lists = list(range(0, num_node_devices // 2)), list(range(num_node_devices // 2, num_node_devices))
    shard_groups = (
        dist.new_group(shard_rank_lists[0]),
        dist.new_group(shard_rank_lists[1]),
    )
    current_shard_group = (
        shard_groups[0] if rank in shard_rank_lists[0] else shard_groups[1]
    )

    # Create replicate groups (for example, (0, 4), (1, 5), (2, 6), (3, 7))
    # and assign the correct replicate group to each rank
    current_replicate_group = None
    shard_factor = len(shard_rank_lists[0])
    for i in range(num_node_devices // 2):
        replicate_group_ranks = list(range(i, num_node_devices, shard_factor))
        replicate_group = dist.new_group(replicate_group_ranks)
        if rank in replicate_group_ranks:
            current_replicate_group = replicate_group

To run the above code snippet, we can leverage PyTorch Elastic. Let's create a file named ``2d_setup.py``.
Then, run the following `torch elastic/torchrun <https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/elastic/quickstart.html>`__ command.

.. code-block:: python
    torchrun --nnodes=1 --nproc_per_node=8 --rdzv_id=100 --rdzv_endpoint=localhost:29400 2d_setup.py

> Note

Reviewer 2: would this "Note" require some special formatting? i.e. sth like

``note::

And then put the below paragraph after this?

For simplicity of demonstration, we are simulating 2D parallel using only one node. Note that this code snippet can also be used when running on multi hosts setup.

With the help of :func:`init_device_mesh`, we can accomplish the above 2D setup in just two lines, and we can still
access the underlying :class:`ProcessGroup` if needed.

.. code-block:: python
    from torch.distributed.device_mesh import init_device_mesh
    mesh_2d = init_device_mesh("cuda", (2, 4), mesh_dim_names=("replicate", "shard"))

    # Users can acess the undelying process group thru `get_group` API.
    replicate_group = mesh_2d.get_group(mesh_dim="replicate")
    shard_group = mesh_2d.get_group(mesh_dim="shard")

Let's create a file named ``2d_setup_with_device_mesh.py``.
Then, run the following `torch elastic/torchrun <https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/elastic/quickstart.html>`__ command.

> .. code-block:: python

Reviewer 2: if we are running in a single host iirc we can simply do:

```
torchrun --nproc_per_node=8 2d_setup_with_device_mesh.py
```

    torchrun --nnodes=1 --nproc_per_node=8 --rdzv_id=100 --rdzv_endpoint=localhost:29400 2d_setup_with_device_mesh.py

How to use DeviceMesh with HSDP
-------------------------------

Hybrid Sharding Data Parallel(HSDP) is 2D strategy to perform FSDP within a host and DDP across hosts.

> Let's see an example of how DeviceMesh can assist with applying HSDP to your model. With DeviceMesh,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's see an example of how DeviceMesh can assist with applying HSDP to your model with a simple setup. With DeviceMesh,
```

users would not need to manually create and manage shard group and replicate group.

> .. code-block:: python

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: python

```

    import torch
    import torch.nn as nn

    from torch.distributed.device_mesh import init_device_mesh
    from torch.distributed.fsdp import FullyShardedDataParallel as FSDP, ShardingStrategy

    class ToyModel(nn.Module):
        def __init__(self):
            super(ToyModel, self).__init__()
            self.net1 = nn.Linear(10, 10)
            self.relu = nn.ReLU()
            self.net2 = nn.Linear(10, 5)

        def forward(self, x):
            return self.net2(self.relu(self.net1(x)))

    # HSDP: MeshShape(2, 4)
    mesh_2d = init_device_mesh("cuda", (2, 4))
    model = FSDP(
        ToyModel(), device_mesh=mesh_2d, sharding_strategy=ShardingStrategy.HYBRID_SHARD
    )

Let's create a file named ``hsdp.py``.
Then, run the following `torch elastic/torchrun <https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/elastic/quickstart.html>`__ command.

.. code-block:: python

>     torchrun --nnodes=1 --nproc_per_node=8 --rdzv_id=100 --rdzv_endpoint=localhost:29400  hsdp.py

Reviewer 2: ditto: not sure if we want to simplify the run command here

> .. code-block:: python

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: python

```
